Refactor and move wal docs (#16387)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/agent/wal-logstore/revert-to-boltdb.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Revert to BoltDB
description: >-
  Learn how to safely configure and test the experimental WAL backend in your Consul deployment.
---

# Revert storage backend to BoltDB from WAL 

> This topic describes revert your Consul storage backend from the experimental WAL LogStorage backend to the default BoltDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic describes how to revert your Consul storage backend from the experimental WAL LogStore backend to the default BoltDB.
```

> The overall process for reverting to BoltDB consists of the following steps. Repeat the steps for all Consul servers that you need to revrt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The overall process for reverting to BoltDB consists of the following steps. Repeat the steps for all Consul servers that you need to revert.
```

1. Select target server.
1. Stop target server gracefully.
1. Remove data directory from target server.
1. Update target server's configuration.
1. Start target server.

## Select target server

If you are using Consul OSS or Consul Enterprise without non-voting servers, select one of the follower servers. As noted in [Risks](/consul/docs/agent/wal-logstore/enable#risks), Consul Enterprise users with non-voting servers should begin the procedure with a non-voting server.

Run the following command to retrieve the current state of the servers:

```shell-session
$ consul operator raft list-peers

> ```

Reviewer: This doesn't seem relevant for this guide - the target server is just whichever one is running WAL that you need to revert. Not sure if this needs a step?

## Stop target server gracefully

> Stop the target server gracefully. For example, if you are using `systemcmd`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stop the target server gracefully. For example, if you are using `systemd`, 
```

run the following command:

```shell-session
$ systemctl stop consul
```

If your environment uses configuration management automation that might interfere with this process, such as Chef or Puppet, you must disable them until you have completely revereted the storage backend.

## Remove data directory from target server

Temporarily moving the data directory to a different location is less destructive than deleting it. We recommend doing this in case you unsuccessfully enable WAL. Do not use the old data directory (`/data-dir/raft.bak`) for recovery after restarting the server. We recommend eventually deleting the old directory.

> The following example moves the data atfrom `/data-dir` in the configuration file to `/temp/data-dir`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example assumes the `data_dir` in the server's configuration is `/data-dir` and renames it to `/data-dir.wal.bak`.
```

```shell-session

> $ mv /data-dir/raft /temp/data-dir/raft.bak

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ mv /data-dir/raft /data-dir/raft.wal.bak
```

```

When switching backend, you must always remove the _whole raft directory_ not just the `raft.db` file or `wal` directory. This is because the log must always be consistent with the snapshots to avoid undefined behavior or data loss.

## Update target server's configuration

Modify the `backend` in the target server's configuration file:

```hcl
raft_logstore {
  backend = "boltdb"
  verification {
    enabled = true
    interval = "60s"
  }
}
```

## Start target server

> Start the target server. For example, if you are using `systemcmd`, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start the target server. For example, if you are using `systemd`, run the following command:
```

```shell-session
$ systemctl start consul
```

Watch for the server to become a healthy voter again.

```shell-session
$ consul operator raft list-peers
```

### Clean up old data directories

> If necessary, cleanup any `raft.bak` directories. Replace `/data-dir` the value you have specified in your configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If necessary, cleanup any `raft.wal.bak` directories. Replace `/data-dir` with the value you have specified in your configuration file.
```
